# 🗓 Release Notes

## 🗄 Version 0.10 

### 0.10.0 (November 2022)

- New feature: [ktk.TimeSeries.count_events](api/ktk.TimeSeries.count_events.rst). Counts the number of occurrences of a given event. This function is useful for example to loop over cycles.
- New feature: [ktk.TimeSeries.remove_duplicate_events](api/ktk.TimeSeries.remove_duplicate_events.rst). Removes duplicate events (that share a same name and same time).
- Improvement: Better error messages. All functions now perform basic real-time type checking and return clear messages in case of unexpected input. Many error messages are also more helpful, particularly in TimeSeries' `get_ts_` methods.
- Improvement: [ktk.Player](api/ktk.Player.rst) now allows interconnections to be any length, not only bouts of two-marker connections.
- Improvement: [ktk.TimeSeries.add_event](api/ktk.TimeSeries.add_event.rst) now has an optional `unique` argument to prevent adding duplicate events.
- Improvement: [ktk.TimeSeries.merge](api/ktk.TimeSeries.merge.rst) does not duplicate events anymore if a same event was present in both TimeSeries.
- Improvement: Now uses Python 3.9 annotations (using `from __future__ import annotations`). Python 3.9 is not required yet, only Python 3.8.
- Improvement: Now uses Numpy's ArrayLike in static typing annotations.
- Bugfix: [ktk.Player](api/ktk.Player.rst)'s `target` parameter now respects the ground plane orientation given by the `up` parameter introduced in 0.9.1.
- Bugfix: [ktk.TimeSeries.sort_events](api/ktk.TimeSeries.sort_events.rst) does not miss duplicate events anymore.
- Deprecation: The following TimeSeries methods were deprecated because they don't provide enough functionality compared to the complexity they generate when learning Kinetics Toolkit by new users. Using those functions now generates a deprecation warning with a suggestion to get the same result with other functions:
    - ``TimeSeries.get_event_index()``
    - ``TimeSeries.get_event_time()``
    - ``TimeSeries.get_ts_at_event()``
    - ``TimeSeries.get_ts_at_time()``
    - ``TimeSeries.sync_event()``
    - ``TimeSeries.ui_get_ts_between_clicks()``
- **Breaking change**: These parameter names were changed in [ktk.kinematics](api/ktk.kinematics.rst):
    - Changed `marker_names` parameter for `names` in [ktk.kinematics.create_cluster](api/ktk.kinematics.create_cluster.rst).
    - Changed `new_point` parameter for `name` in [ktk.kinematics.extend_cluster](api/ktk.kinematics.extend_cluster.rst).
- **Breaking change**: Changed default value of `unique` from `True` to `False` in [ktk.TimeSeries.sort_events](api/ktk.TimeSeries.sort_events.rst).


## 🗄 Version 0.9

### 0.9.2 (September 2022)

- Bugfix: Resolved an error in [ktk.read_c3d](api/ktk.read_c3d.rst) where reading would fail on c3d files with empty events.

### 0.9.1 (September 2022)

- New feature: [ktk.Player](api/ktk.Player.rst) now has a `up` parameter. Before, the ground plane was xz with y being up. Now, any ground plane can be used, by choosing `up` among {'x', 'y', 'z', '-x', '-y', '-z'}.

### 0.9.0 (August 2022)

- New feature: [ktk.TimeSeries.resample](api/ktk.TimeSeries.resample.rst) to resample a TimeSeries on a new time vector, with the method of your choice (sample-and-hold, linear, spline, etc.)
- New feature: [ktk.TimeSeries.get_sample_rate](api/ktk.TimeSeries.get_sample_rate.rst) returns the TimeSeries sample rate, or NaN if the sample rate is not constant.
- New feature: [ktk.read_c3d](api/ktk.read_c3d.rst) replaces `ktk.kinematics.read_c3d_file`, and now reads analogs and events in addition to points.
- New feature: [ktk.write_c3d](api/ktk.write_c3d.rst) replaces `ktk.kinematics.write_c3d_file`.
- Deprecation: `ktk.kinematics.read_n3d_file` was moved to the [n3d extension](https://github.com/felixchenier/kineticstoolkit_n3d).
- Improvement: All docstrings were rewritten to be clearer, to better comply to the numpydoc standard, to provide better examples, and to refer to similar functions ("see also" statements).
- Bugfix: c3d files with accented characters in path should now be readable on Windows.


## 🗄 Version 0.8 (June 2022)

- New feature: [Extension support](extensions.md).
- Deprecation: pushrimkinetics module is deprecated and now available as an [extension](https://github.com/felixchenier/kineticstoolkit_pushrimkinetics).
- Bugfix: Marker units are now correctly generated by `kinetics.track_cluster()`.

## 🗄 Version 0.7 (April 2022)

- New feature: Marker reconstruction using point clusters, using `kinematics.create_cluster()`, `kinematics.extend_cluster()`, `kinematics.track_cluster()`.
- New feature: Added the new `doc` module, which allows downloading sample data on the fly to reproduce every step of the tutorials.
- Bugfix: `data_info` were not generated anymore in `pushrimkinetics` functions.
- Bugfix: `TimeSeries.sync_event` did not work anymore.
- Improvement: `ezc3d` was added to the conda package's dependencies. Now Kinetics Toolkit is installed simply using `conda install -c conda-forge kineticstoolkit`.
- Improvement: Renamed `frame` for `index` in Player's variable names, to avoid confusion between a frame (matrix) and a frame (image number).
- Improvement: Renamed `segments` for `interconnections` in Player, to avoid confusion between a body segment and a group of interconnections between arbitrary points.
- **Breaking change**: New default for `TimeSeries.merge`'s `overwrite` option. It changed from True to False.

## 🗄 Version 0.6 (August 2021)

- ~~New feature: Rigid body tracking and reconstruction of virtual markers in module `kinematics`: functions `define_rigid_body()`, `define_virtual_marker()`, and `track_rigid_body()`.~~
- New feature: Interactive method to edit events in a TimeSeries: method `TimeSeries.ui_edit_events()`.
- Improvement: All TimeSeries methods now work on copies, see breaking changes below.
- **Important breaking change** - Every `TimeSeries` method now works on a copy of the TimeSeries. The original TimeSeries is never modified itself. It was already the case for methods such as `get_ts_between_events()` etc. which would not affect the original TimeSeries, but not for others such as `add_event()`, `rename_data()`, etc. This modification was made in an effort to standardize the TimeSeries behaviour and to allow safe method chaining. This choice is a bit drastic and was implemented quickly because we are still early in Kinetics Toolkit's development. It has been encouraged by Pandas' choice, which seems to also go in a similar direction (https://github.com/pandas-dev/pandas/issues/16529). To migrate your code to the new behaviour, please change your method calls accordingly by adding an assignation before the call. For example: `ts.add_event(...)` becomes `ts = ts.add_event(...)`. The full list of methods that have been changed is:
    - `add_data_info()`
    - `add_event()`
    - `fill_missing_samples()`
    - `merge()`
    - `remove_data()`
    - `remove_data_info()`
    - `remove_event()`
    - `rename_data()`
    - `rename_event()`
    - `shift()`
    - `sort_events()`
    - `sync_event()`
    - `trim_events()`
    - `ui_add_event()` (now discontinued in favour of `ui_edit_events`)

**Please do not update to 0.6 until you are ready to find and modify those statements in your current code**.

## 🗄 Version 0.5 (June 2021)

- New feature: Coordinate system origins are now clickable in Player.
- Improvement: Most TimeSeries arguments can now be used either by position or keyword (removed superflous slash operators in signatures).
- Improvement: TimeSeriesEvent class is now a proper data class. This has no implication on usability, but the API is cleaner and more robust.
- Bug fixes.
- **Breaking change:** `cycle.detect_cycles` was changed back to experimental. Its argument pairs xxxx1, xxxx2 have been changed to sequences [xxxx1, xxxx2] in prevision of possible cycle detections with more than 2 phases, or even only one phase. This method is now experimental because it may be separated into different functions (one to detect cycles, another to search cycles with given criteria, and another to remove found cycles).

## 🗄 Version 0.4 (April 2021)

- New feature: Added the `geometry` module to perform rigid body geometry operations such as creating frames, homogeneous transforms, multiplying series of matrices, converting from local to global coordinates and vice-versa, and extracting Euler angles from homogeneous transforms.
- New feature: Added the `span` option to `cycles.time_normalize`, so that cycles can be normalized between other ranges than 0% to 100%. Both reducing span (e.g., 10% to 90%) and increasing span (e.g., -25 to 125%) work.
- New feature: Added the `to_html5` method to `Player`, which allows visualizing 3d markers and bodies in Jupyter.
- New feature: Added the `rename_event` method to `TimeSeries`.
- Improvement: Added test coverage measurement for continuous improvement of code robustness.
- Improvement: Added warnings when using private or unstable functions.
- Improvement: Changed the website to use the ReadTheDoc theme, and changed its structure to facilitate continuous improvements of the website without needing to wait for releases.
- **Breaking change**: The default behaviour for `TimeSeries.remove_event` changed when no occurrence is defined. Previously, only the first occurrence was removed. Now every occurrence is removed.
- **Breaking change:** In `cycles.time_normalize`, the way to time-normalize between two events of the same name changed from `event_name, _` to `event_name, event_name`.

## 🗄 Version 0.3 (October 2020)

- New feature: Added the `cycles` module to detect, time-normalize and stack cycles (e.g., gait cycles, wheelchair propulsion cycles, etc.)
- New feature: Added the `pushrimkinetics` module to read files from instrumented wheelchair wheels, reconstruct the pushrim kinetics,
  remove dynamic offsets in kinetic signals, and perform speed and power calculation for analysing spatiotemporal and kinetic
  parameters of wheelchair propulsion.
- New feature: Added lab mode to allow importing ktk without changing defaults.
- New feature: Added `ktk.filters.deriv()` to derivate TimeSeries.
- New feature: Added `ktk.filters.median()`, which is a running median filter function.
- Improvement: `TimeSeries.plot()` now shows the event occurrences besides the event names.
- Improvement: Nicer tutorial for the `filters` module.
- Improvement: Improved unit tests for the `filters` module.
- **Breaking change:** The module name has been changed from `ktk` to `kineticstoolkit`. Importing using `import ktk` is now deprecated and the standard way to import is now either `import kineticstoolkit as ktk` or `import kineticstoolkit.lab as ktk`.
- **Breaking change:** Now importing Kinetics Toolkit does not change IPython's representation of dicts or matplotlib's defaults. This allows using ktk's functions without modifying the current working environment. The old behaviour is now the lab mode and is the recommended way to import Kinetics Toolkit in an IPython-based environment: `import kineticstoolkit.lab as ktk`.

## 🗄 Version 0.2 (August 2020)

- New feature: Added the functions `ktk.load` and `ktk.save`.
- New feature: Introduced the `ktk.zip` file format.
- New feature: Added the `gui` module to show messages, input dialogs and file/folder pickers.
- New feature: Added the `filters` module with TimeSeries wrappers for scipy's butterworth and savitsky-golay filters.
- New feature: Added interactive methods to TimeSeries: `TimeSeries.ui_add_event()`, `TimeSeries.ui_get_ts_between_clicks()` and `TimeSeries.ui_sync()` (experimental).
- New feature: Added `TimeSeries.remove_event()` method.
- New feature: Added `TimeSeries.resample()` (experimental).
- Improvement: Updated the documentation system using sphinx and jupyter-lab.
- Improvement: Improved performance of `TimeSeries.from_dataframe()`
- Improvement: ktk is now typed.
- **Breaking change:** `TimeSeries.from_dataframe()` is now a class function and not an instance method anymore. Therefore we need to call `ktk.TimeSeries.from_dataframe(dataframe)` instead of `ktk.TimeSeries().from_dataframe(dataframe)`.
- **Breaking change:** Now depends on python 3.8 instead of 3.7.

## 🗄 Version 0.1 (May 2020)

- New feature: Added the `TimeSeries` class.
- New feature: Added the `kinematics` module, to read c3d and n3d files.
- New feature: Added the `Player` class, to view markers in 3d.
